.TH CALLISTO 1 "February 2017" "callisto"
.SH NAME
callisto \- Unix version of the
.I e-Callisto
software
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B callisto
[ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
The Unix version of the e-Callisto software is a daemon program that
can record uncalibrated data and spectral overviews from the Callisto
hardware. If calibration of the data is desired, it must be done
afterwards by other means. The recorded data is saved as FITS files
into the configured directory. Version 1.1.0 of the software supports
Callisto firmware versions 1.5, 1.7 and 1.8. Previous versions
supported only firmware version 1.5.
.P
The program operation can be controlled by a schedule file, and also
directly via a command server listening on a TCP port.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "-c, --config " FILE
Use the specified configuration file instead of
.BR /etc/callisto/callisto.cfg .
The location of the configuration file also specifies the
configuration directory, which is where other configuration files
(frequency file and schedule) are assumed to be in if they are not
specified with an absolute file name.
.TP
.BI "-o, --datadir " DIR
Specify the directory where the recorded data is stored as FITS files.
This overrides the value set in the configuration file.
.TP
.BI "-O, --ovsdir " DIR
Specify the directory where spectral overview result files are
written. This overrides the value set in the configuration file.
.TP
.BI "-s, --schedule " FILE
Use the given schedule file instead of
.B scheduler.cfg
in the configuration directory.
.TP
.BI "-u, --user " USER
Run as the given user.
.TP
.B "-L, --load-channels"
Upload the channel frequency data into the EEPROM. This is not
normally done to conserve EEPROM write cycles, and also to speed up
program start. The data only needs to be uploaded if the channel
frequencies have changed.
.TP
.B "-C, --check-only"
Try to reset and identify Callisto hardware, and exit with status 0 if
Callisto is detected, and with status 1 otherwise. The check is done
after channel upload, so -L and -C can be used together for channel
upload.
.TP
.BI "-P, --pidfile " FILE
Write program PID in the specified file.
.TP
.B "-d, --debug"
Do not fork into background and turn on verbose debug
messages. Logging is output to stderr.
.TP
.B "-D, --serial-debug"
Print serial port traffic into stderr. Give this option twice to enable
colors: red color for data going to Callisto and blue for data coming
from Callisto. This option implies --debug.
.TP
.B "-V, --version"
Print program version.
.TP
.B "-h, --help"
Print program help text showing available options.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
.P
The Unix callisto uses the same configuration file format as the Windows software: entries are in the format
.B [variable]=value
and comments start with
.BR // " or " /* .
The variables are compatible with the Windows software, except of
course those that refer to file paths.
.P
The following variables must be defined:
.TP
.B rxcomport
Full path of the serial port device where the Callisto hardware is
connected to this computer, e.g. /dev/ttyS0.
.TP
.B instrument
Short instrument code, appears as the first component of the FITS file names.
.TP
.B origin
Location of the instrument (e.g. the institute/observatory).
.TP
.B frqfile
The channel frequency file to use. the file name is either an absolute
path, or relative to the configuration directory.
.TP
.B datapath
The directory where FITS files of the recorded data are stored.
.TP
.B longitude
Longitude of the instrument location in degrees, in the form of
.BR E,12.3 " or " W,45.6 .
.TP
.B latitude
Longitude of the instrument location in degrees, in the form of
.BR N,12.3 " or " S,45.6 .
.TP
.B height
Height above sea level of the instrument location, in meters.
.TP
.B filetime
The time in seconds to record into one FITS file.
.TP
.B focuscode
The focuscode to use.
.P
The following variables may be defined:
.TP
.B ovspath
The directory where spectral overview files are stored. Default is
the value of
.BR datapath .
.TP
.B chargepump
Whether PLL charge pump should be on or off.  Default is 1 (on).
.TP
.B agclevel
PWM level for tuner AGC.  Default is 120.
.TP
.B clocksource
Which source to use as the sampling clock. 1 for internal clock, 2 for
external 1 MHz clock. Default is 1 (internal clock).
.TP
.B mmode
Select the measurement mode. As only mode 3 is supported, setting this
to any other value will cause an error on callisto startup. Defaults
to 3.
.TP
.B autostart
If set to 1, recording is automatically started on program startup. If
set to 0, recording is not automatically started. If not defined or
set to a negative value, the autostart value is deduced from the
schedule, or set to 1 if there is no schedule. Default is -1 (deduce
from schedule).
.P
The following variables are specific to the Unix version:
.TP
.B net_port
Start the command server on this TCP port. If not defined, the command
server is not started.
.P
Variables not listed above are ignored.
.SH FREQUENCY FILE
.P
The frequency file has the same syntax as the configuration file. The
following variables must be defined:
.TP
.B target
This must have the value CALLISTO.
.TP
.B number_of_measurements_per_sweep
The number of channels to use, from 1 to 512.
.TP
.B number_of_sweeps_per_second
How many channel sweeps to perform per second. The sample rate derived
from multiplying the number of channels by this value should not
exceed 1000.
.P
The following variable may be defined:
.TP
.B external_lo
Frequency of the frontend downconverter local oscillator in
MHz. Defaults to 0.
.P
Additionally there must be an entry in the form
.I [NNNN]=FFF.FFF,L
for each channel used, where NNNN is the channel number, from 1
onwards, FFF.FFF is the channel frequency in MHz, and L is the number
of lightcurve samples (ignored by the Unix version).
.SH OUTPUT AND LOGGING
.P
The FITS files have a file name in the format
.IR CCC_YYYYMMDD_hhmmss_FF.fit ,
where CCC is the instrument code specified by the configuration variable
.BR instrument ,
YYYYMMDD and hhmmss are the (UTC) starting date and time of the data in the
file, and FF is the focuscode used.
.P
Spectral overview file names have the format
.IR OVS_CCC_YYYYMMDD_hhmmss.prn .
.P
Logging is done to the daemon facility of syslog, which typically ends
up in /var/log/daemon.log.
.SH COMMAND SERVER
.P
The command server listens at the TCP port specified by the
configuration file variable
.BR net_port .
When a connection is established, the server prints a banner line
"e-Callisto for Unix V.V.V", where V.V.V is the program version. After
that it will accept commands. Responses to commands consist of a
status line beginning either with OK or ERROR, followed by zero or
more data lines, and terminated by an empty line. The following
commands are available.
.TP
.B start
Start data recording. If a spectral overview is in progress, recording
is started after it finishes. If recording is already in progress, a
new FITS file is started at the end of the current channel sweep.
This command never fails.
.TP
.B stop
Stop data recording. If a spectral overview is in progress, recording
is not (re)started after it finishes. This command never fails.
.TP
.B overview
Start a spectral overview. If an overview is already in progress, this
command is ignored. After the overview has finished, the recording
state is restored to its previous value (unless start or stop commands
were issued during the overview). This command never fails.
.TP
.B get
Get the data from the latest complete channel sweep. The first data
line printed is in the format
.IR t=NNNNNNNNNN.NNNNNN ,
giving the start time of the sweep in Unix epoch time. The rest of the
data lines have the format
.IR chNNN=FFF.FFF:XXX ,
where NNN is the channel number, from 001 to 512, FFF.FFF is the
channel frequency in MHz, and XXX is the channel value (in A/D
converter units). This command may fail if there is no data in the
buffer.
.TP
.B quit
Close connection to the command server. This command never fails.
.SH SCHEDULING
.P
Scheduled operation of the program is supported via a schedule
file. The default schedule file is
.B scheduler.cfg
in the configuration directory. The schedule file contains entries in
the format
.IR hh:mm:ss,FF,A ,
which specifies the UTC time hh:mm:ss of the schedule entry, the
focuscode FF for which it is valid for, and the action A to
take. Supported actions are start (3), stop (0) and overview (8).
.P
The Unix version of callisto does not support changing the focuscode
or the frequency file (which would be the optional fourth field of the
schedule entry) on the fly.
.P
If there is no schedule file, the program remains in manual control,
possibly starting recording automatically on startup. The schedule
file is checked for existence or changes every minute. If the schedule
file appears or has changed, it is (re)loaded and the new schedule
becomes active. If the program is in scheduled operation, and the
schedule file disappears, is empty, or cannot be read, the program
reverts to manual control and recording is started.
.P
The helper script
.BR callisto-sunschedule (1)
can be used to create schedule files that record data only between
sunrise and sunset.
.SH SIGNALS
.P
Sending the
.B HUP
signal to the callisto program has the same effect as issuing the
start command via the command server.
.P
When the program receives the
.B TERM
signal, it tries to exit cleanly by stopping the Callisto hardware and
writing any pending data buffers to disk. If a second termination
signal is sent before the clean exit has finished, the program exits
immediately, possibly causing the latest data to be lost.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /etc/callisto
Default configuration directory.
.TP
.B /etc/callisto/callisto.cfg
Default configuration file.
.TP
.B /etc/callisto/scheduler.cfg
Default schedule file.
.SH AUTHOR
.P
Juha Aatrokoski <jha@kurp.hut.fi>
.SH SEE ALSO
.P
.BR callisto-sunschedule (1)
.P
http://www.e-callisto.org/
.P
http://www.e-callisto.org/Software/Callisto-Software.html
